.. _cooling-revisited:

Cooling Revisited
-----------------

Changing Ambient Conditions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We will start with a simple example that demonstrates time events.  We
will revisit the thermal model introduced previously in the section on
:ref:`physical-types`.  However, this time we will introduce a
disturbance to that system.  Specifically, we will trigger an abrupt
decrease in the ambient temperature after half a second of simulation.
This revised model is written as follows:

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/DiscreteBehavior/CoolingRevisited/NewtonCoolingDynamic.mo
   :language: modelica
   :emphasize-lines: 21-25
   :lines: 2-

.. index:: if statement

The highlight lines show an ``if`` statement.  This particular ``if``
statement provides two different equations for computing ``T_inf``.

.. topic:: Time

   You will note in this model the variable ``time`` is not declared
   within our model.  This is because ``time`` is a built-in variable
   in all Modelica models.

The decision about which of the two equations will actually be used
depends on the conditional expression ``time<=0.5``.  It is because
this expression only depends on ``time`` and not any other variables
in our model that we can characterize the transition between these two
equations as a "time event".  The key point is that when integrating
these equations, we can tell the solver that integrates our system of
equations to stop precisely at 0.5 seconds and then resume again using
a different equation.  We'll see examples of other state events where
this would not be possible, in the next section when we present the
classic :ref:`bouncing-ball` example.

But for now, let us continue with our cooling example.  If we simulate
this model for one second, we get the following temperature
trajectory:

.. plot:: ../plots/NCD.py
   :class: interactive

As you can see in these results, the ambient temperature does indeed
start to decrease after half a second.  In studying the dynamic
response of the temperature itself, we see two distinct phases.  The
first phase is the initial transient response toward equilibrium (to
match the ambient temperature).  The second phase is the tracking of
the ambient temperature as it decreases.

Initial Transients
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is worth noting that this is a very common issue in modeling.
Frequently, you wish to model the systems response to some disturbance
(like the ambient temperature decrease in this case).  However, if you
don't start your system in some kind of equilibrium state, the system
response will also include some kind of initial transient (like the
one shown here).  In order to distinguish these two responses clearly,
we want to avoid any overlap between them.  **The simplest way to do
that is to start the simulation in an equilibrium condition** (as
discussed previous in our discussion of :ref:`steady-state`).  This
avoids the initial transient altogether and allows us to focus
entirely on the disturbance that we are interested in.

As we learned during our discussion of :ref:`initialization`, we can
solve this problem of initial transients by simply including an
initial equation that will determine a value for ``T`` such that our
system starts in an equilibrium state, *i.e.,*

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/DiscreteBehavior/CoolingRevisited/NewtonCoolingSteadyThenDynamic.mo
   :language: modelica
   :emphasize-lines: 15
   :lines: 2-

The only thing we've changed is the initial equation.  Instead of
starting our system at some fixed temperature, we start it at a
temperature such that the change in temperature (at least initially,
prior to our disturbance) is zero.  Now the temperature response no
longer includes any initial transient and we can focus only on the
response to the disturbance:

.. plot:: ../plots/NCSTD.py
   :class: interactive

.. cooling-if-expr:

Compactness
^^^^^^^^^^^

One issue with ``if`` statements is that they can make relatively
simple changes in behavior appear quite complicated.  There are a
couple of alternative constructs we can use to get the same behavior
with fewer lines of code.

.. index:: if expression

The first approach is to use an ``if`` **expression**.  Whereas an
``if`` statement includes "branches" containing equations, an ``if``
expression has branches that contain only expressions.  Furthermore,
the syntax for an ``if`` expression is also less verbose.  If we had
chosen to use an ``if`` expression our ``equation`` could have
been simplified to:

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/DiscreteBehavior/CoolingRevisited/NewtonCoolingIfExpression.mo
   :language: modelica
   :lines: 16-18

.. index:: max

Alternatively, we could use one of the many built-in Modelica
functions, like ``max``, to represent the change in the ambient
temperature, *e.g.,*

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/DiscreteBehavior/CoolingRevisited/NewtonCoolingMinFunction.mo
   :language: modelica
   :lines: 16-18

Events
^^^^^^

We've seen several ways to express the fact that there is an abrupt
change in the behavior of our system.  But it's important to point out
that we are not just describing a change in the ambient temperature,
we are also specifying **when** it changes.  This a subtle, but very
important, point.

Consider the last example, where our system began in an equilibrium
state.  At the start of the simulation, there are no significant
dynamics.  Since nothing is really changing in the system, the
integrator is unlikely to accumulate significant integration error.
So, in order to minimize the amount of time required to complete the
simulation, variable time step integrators will, in such
circumstances, increase their step size.

There is, however, a risk in doing this.  The risk is that the
integrator may get "blind-sided" by a sudden disturbance in the
system.  If such a disturbance were to occur, the integrator's
assumptions that a large step will not lead to significant integration
error would not be true.

The question then becomes, how can the integrator *know* when it can
take a large time step and when it cannot.  Typically, these
integration schemes use a kind of trial and error approach.  They
try to take large step and then estimate the amount of error
introduced by that step.  If it is less than some threshold, then they
accept the state (or perhaps try a larger step).  If, on the other
hand, the step introduces too much error, then they try a smaller
step.  But they cannot know how small a step will be required to get
under the error threshold, which means they will continue to blindly
try smaller and smaller steps.

But Modelica is about much more than integrating the underlying
system.  Modelica compilers study the **structure** of the problem.
In all of our examples, the compiler can see that there is a distinct
change in behavior.  Not only that, it can see that this change in
behavior is a time event, *i.e.,* an event whose time is known *a
priori* without any knowledge of the solution trajectory.

So, what a Modelica compiler will do is inform the underlying
integrator that there will be an abrupt change in behavior at 0.5
seconds and it will instruct the integrator to simply integrate
exactly up to that point and no further.  As a result, the abrupt
change never occurs **within a time step**.  Instead, the integrator
will simply restart on the other side of the event.  This completely
avoids the blind searching for the cutoff time that minimizes the
error in the step.  Instead, the integrator will integrate right up
to that point automatically and then restart after that point.

This is one of many examples of features in Modelica that optimize the
way a simulation is carried out.  A more detailed discussion of this
kind of handling can be found in the upcoming section on
:ref:`events`.  In the coming sections, we'll also see more complex
examples of events that depend on the solution variables.
