.. _first-order:

Simple First Order System
-------------------------

Let us consider an extremely simple differential equation:

.. math:: \dot{x} = (1-x)

Looking at this equation, we see there is only one variable,
:math:`x`.  This equation can be represented in Modelica as follows:

.. _ex_SimpleExample_FirstOrder:

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/BasicEquations/SimpleExample/FirstOrder.mo
   :language: modelica
   :lines: 2-

.. index:: model
.. index:: der
.. index:: Real

This code starts with the keyword ``model`` which is used to indicate
the start of the model definition.  The ``model`` keyword is followed by the
model name, ``FirstOrder``.  This, in turn, is followed by a
declaration of all the variables we are interested in.

Since the variable :math:`x` in our equation is clearly meant to be a
continuous real valued variable, its declaration in Modelica takes
the form ``Real x;``.  The ``Real`` type is just one of the types we
can use (a more complete description of the various possibilities will
be discussed in the upcoming section on :ref:`variables`).

Once all the variables have been declared, we can begin including the
equations that describe the behavior of our model.  In this case, we
can use the ``der`` operator to represent the time derivative of
``x``.  Thus,

.. code-block:: modelica

    der(x) = (1-x)

is equivalent to:

.. math:: \dot{x} = (1-x)

Unlike most programming languages, we don't approach code like this as
a "program" that can be interpreted as a set of instructions to be
executed one after the other.  Instead, we use a Modelica compiler to
transform this model into something that we can simulate.  This
simulation step essentially amounts to solving (usually numerically)
the equation and providing a solution trajectory like this:

.. plot:: ../plots/FO.py
   :include-source: no

This gives you the first initial hint at one of the compelling aspects
about using a modeling language to describe mathematical behavior.  We
didn't need to describe how to solve this differential equation.  The
focus is entirely on behavior.  As we work our way through more
complex examples, we will see that **much of the tedious work
involving the solution process is handled automatically by the
Modelica compiler**.

.. _first-order-doc:

Adding Some Documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Now that we've solved this simple mathematical equation, let's turn
our attention briefly to how we can make the model a bit more
readable.  Consider the following model:

.. _ex_SimpleExample_FirstOrderDocumented:

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/BasicEquations/SimpleExample/FirstOrderDocumented.mo
   :language: modelica
   :lines: 2-

.. index:: descriptive strings

Note the quoted text in this model.

It is important to understand that the quoted text blocks, called "strings"
in computer science, are **not** comments.  They are "descriptive strings" and,
unlike comments, they cannot be added in arbitrary places.  Instead,
they can only be inserted in specific places to provide additional
documentation about the elements of the model they are associated with.

For example, the first string "A simple first order differential
equation" is used to describe what this is a model of.  Note how it
follows the name of the model.  If you wish to include such
documentation about the model, it must appear immediately after the
model name as shown.

As we will see later, this kind of documentation can be used by tools
in many ways.  For example, when searching for models, a tool may use
these descriptive strings when identifying matches.  This text may also
be associated with a graphical representation of the models.  And, of
course, this kind of documentation is very useful for anybody reading
the model.

As this example demonstrates, there are other places that the
descriptive text can appear.  For example, it may be included after
the declaration of a variable or equation to document them.

.. _first-order-init:

Initialization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As we have seen already, Modelica allows us to describe model behavior
in terms of differential equations.  But the initial conditions we
choose are just as important as the equations.

For this reason, Modelica also provides constructs for describing the
initialization of our system of equations.  For example, if we wanted
the initial value of ``x`` in our model to be *2*, we could add an
``initial equation`` section to our model as follows:

.. index:: initial equation

.. _ex_SimpleExample_FirstOrderInitial:

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/BasicEquations/SimpleExample/FirstOrderInitial.mo
   :language: modelica
   :lines: 2-

.. todo::
   note: the descriptive strings for the model and for the variable Real x are
   different between FirstOrderInitial and FirstOrderDocumented 

Note that the only difference between this model and the previous one,
presented in the section on :ref:`first-order-doc`, is the addition of
the ``initial equation`` section which contains the equation ``x =
2``.  By adding this equation to the ``initial equation`` section, we
are specifying that this system has a different initial starting
condition.

.. todo::
   different from what? - maybe explicityly mention default initial
   values, although it seems to be implied

As a result, the solution trajectory is quite different as
we can see in the following figure:

.. plot:: ../plots/FOI.py
   :include-source: no

The model ``FirstOrderInitial`` shows a typical way of initializing a
system by providing explicit initial values for the states of the
system.  In fact, a system of differential equations is incomplete
without a specification for how the initial conditions are determined.
Our ``FirstOrderInitial`` model would be represented mathematically
as:

.. math:: \dot{x} = (1-x);\; x(0) = 2

However, there are many cases where you want a more sophisticated type
of initialization.  An ``initial equation`` section can contain more
than just explicit equations for the initial values of the state
variables.

For example, we might want our initial conditions to be such that the
derivative of :math:`x` was zero at the start of the simulation.  In
this case, only a bit of trivial algebra is required to realize that
this could be accomplished by specifying an initial condition of
:math:`x(0)=1`.  However, for more complex systems, it is far from
trivial to determine the initial state values that would satisfy such
a requirement.  In those cases, it is possible to express the
constraint that :math:`\dot{x}(0)=0` directly in Modelica as follows:

.. _ex_SimpleExample_FirstOrderSteady:

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/BasicEquations/SimpleExample/FirstOrderSteady.mo
   :language: modelica
   :lines: 2-

Simulating this system gives the following solution:

.. plot:: ../plots/FOS.py
   :include-source: no

As we see from these results, the initial derivative of :math:`x` is
zero at the start of the simulation and remains zero because there are
no external influences acting on this system that would disrupt this
equilibrium.

This provides a glimpse of the initialization capablities in Modelica.
More complete coverage of the initialization topic can be found in the
:ref:`initialization` section later in this chapter.

.. _experimental-conditions:

Experimental Conditions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. index:: annotation
.. index:: annotation; experiment

When building a model, the model developer might wish to associate
specific experimental conditions with the model.  This can be done
using something called an ``annotation``.  An annotation includes
information that is not directly related to the behavior of the model.

For example, experimental conditions describe information like the
start time of the simulation, the stop time, solution tolerance and so
on.  This is not information about the behavior of the model itself,
but rather information about how to approach simulating that behavior.
Experimental conditions are stored in a model using a specific
annotation called the ``experiment`` annotation.

There are four pieces of information that can be specified in an
experiment annotation.  All of them are optional.  The following is a
model of our first order system that includes an experiment
annotation:

.. literalinclude:: /ModelicaByExample/BasicEquations/SimpleExample/FirstOrderExperiment.mo
   :language: modelica
   :lines: 2-
   :emphasize-lines: 3

The following trajectory was simulated using these experimental
conditions:

.. plot:: ../plots/FOE.py
   :include-source: no

The trajectory terminates at 8 seconds because the simulator used the
``experiment`` annotation to determine how long to run the simulation.

.. todo::
   Question: is the experiment annotation merely a suggestion? Or does
   it force the tool running the model to use those settings? Or is
   it implementation dependent?